in the year 1812
a swiss explorer and eccentric named
johann ludwig burkhart was travelling in
the middle east in the region of what is
today jordan
[Music]
burkhart was a strange and colorful
character
born on the shores of lake geneva he had
traveled to england to study and there
had been employed by a group known as
the african association a gathering of
upper-class englishmen who financed
expeditions of exploration
they had given burkhardt the task of
crossing the sahara desert from cairo
and making contact with what was then
considered a lost city
the city of timbuktu
burkhardt took his assignment seriously
and he threw himself into it with all
the energy of a true georgian eccentric
he began to study arabic at cambridge
university and while there he began
dressing in traditional arab clothing
wearing long white dish dashes and a
turban much to the bemusement of his
fellow students
after graduating he moved to syria and
spent two years there practicing his
arabic even adopting the name sheikh
ibrahim ibn abdullah and attempting to
pass himself off as a muslim
it's not clear how successful burkhart's
disguise really was or whether anyone in
the arab world was fooled
in preparation for his great journey he
set out on a number of expeditions into
the syrian desert but many of these
ended in disaster
he was robbed on a number of occasions
often by the same people he had hired to
act as security on the journey but his
desire for adventure was unabated by
these setbacks and in 1812 he set out on
the journey from syria to cairo
with the intention there of securing
passage across the great sandy sea of
the sahara
it was on this journey taking the more
dangerous inland route through the
baking summer heat of the desert that
burkhart would make quite a different
discovery
it was here that his guides told him of
a series of mysterious ruins hidden in a
narrow valley nearby which was known by
locals as wadi musa or the valley of
moses
at this point burkhart was still in
disguise as an arab
and he contrived an excuse to visit the
ruins
as he writes in his diary
august 22nd 1812
i was particularly desirous of visiting
moses's valley
the antiquities of which i had heard the
country people speak in terms of great
admiration
i hired a guide at lg to conduct me
there and paid him with a pair of old
horseshoes
he carried the goat and gave me a skin
of water to carry as he knew that there
was no water in the valley below
as burkhardt traveled with his guide
down into the dry valley he began to
feel increasingly fearful that someone
would see through his disguise
and his ruse would be discovered
in following the rivulet of lg westwards
the valley soon narrows again and it is
here that the antiquities of wadi musa
begin
of these i regret i am not able to give
a very complete account but i knew well
the character of the people around me
i was without protection in the midst of
a desert when no traveller had ever
before been seen
and a close examination of these works
of the infidels as they are called would
have excited suspicions that i was a
magician in search of treasures future
travelers may visit the spot under the
protection of an armed force and the
antiquities of wadi musa will then be
found to rank amongst the most curious
remains of ancient art
burkhardt's guides led him towards what
from a distance appeared to be a sheer
cliff of brilliant red sandstone
but as he drew closer he saw a
well-concealed ravine opening up in the
stone wall from which a sparse stream
was flowing
the valley seemed to be entirely closed
by high rocks but upon a nearer approach
i perceived a chasm about 15 or 20 feet
in breath
through which the rivulet flows westward
in winter
the precipices on either side of the
torrent are about 80 feet in height
in many places the opening between them
at the top is less than at the bottom
and the sky is not visible from below
as burkhart traveled down this shady
chasm
his sense of excitement gradually grew
to wonder as he came upon the sight of
an enormous tomb
carved into the very rock of the red
sandstone mass around him
in continuing along the winding passage
an excavated mausoleum came in view
the situation and beauty of which are
calculated to make an extraordinary
impression upon the traveler after
having traversed for nearly half an hour
such a gloomy and almost subterraneous
passage as i have described
the natives call this monument kostra
faroon or pharaoh's castle and pretend
that it was the residence of a prince
but it was rather the sepulcher of a
prince
and great must have been the opulence of
a city which could dedicate such
monuments to the memory of its rulers
it's clear that the sight of this hidden
wonder had an enormous effect on
burkhart and he writes breathlessly in
his diary about the sight of this
enormous edifice
it is one of the most elegant remains of
antiquity existing in syria its state of
preservation resembles that of a
building recently finished and on closer
examination i found it to be a work of
immense labor
the colonnade is about 35 feet high and
the columns are about three feet in
diameter with corinthian capitals
the colonnade is crowned with a pediment
which consisted of an insulated cylinder
crowned with a vars standing between two
other structures in the shape of small
temples supported by short pillars
the entire front from the base of the
columns to the top of the ornaments may
be 60 or 65 feet
johann burkhart would be the first
european in modern times to set foot in
a city that for much of the previous
millennium had been only a legend
this was the ancient city of petra
for centuries it had been the heart of a
powerful trading kingdom that controlled
the flow of spice and incense coming
across the desert from the lands of the
east
its people had built vast constructions
carved with immaculate skill into the
sandstone bedrock of the desert itself
and tamed one of the harshest
environments to be found on planet earth
they had fought and traded with empires
and played a starring role in many of
the historical dramas of their age
they were called the nabataeans
as burkhart wondered through the gullies
and chasms of that lost city he must
have wondered how such a society had
flourished out here in the harsh
landscape of the arabian desert
and if so great a civilization had
arisen here what had happened to empty
its temples and streets and leave it to
be buried in the wandering sands of the
desert
[Music]
my name's paul cooper and you're
listening to the fall of civilization's
podcast
each episode i look at a civilization of
the past that rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of history i
want to ask what did they have in common
what led to their fall and what did it
feel like to be a person alive at the
time who witnessed the end of their
world
in this episode i want to look at one of
the most remarkable stories of
civilizational survival to come down to
us from the ancient world
the story of the trading empire of the
nabateans
i want to explore how these once humble
traders rose to become masters of the
desert sands and to defy empires
i want to show how the city of petra
flourished to become the crossroads of
the world
and i want to explore what happened to
finally bring down the empire of
nabataea
sandstone is a sedimentary rock
it's formed when layers of sand are
piled one upon another and then over
time subjected to enormous pressure
this pressure along with natural mineral
processes fuses the sand grains together
into rock
beneath the lands of jordan where this
historical drama will unfold
two great beds of sandstone stretch out
these are known as dc sandstone
and um ishrin sandstone
dc sandstone is the youngest and
uppermost layer
sandstones can be any color depending on
the kinds of grains that went into
forming it and this kind is hard pale
grey and usually erodes to form
distinctive dome-like structures
but beneath this layer is a layer of
older sandstone at least 20 million
years older this is um ishrin sandstone
and it's easily recognizable by the
beautiful patterns it forms
and due to its composition of iron
hydroxides and manganese oxides it is
famous for its colour
woven with rich oranges purples
and deep rosy reds
the winding interlaced patterns on these
stones were formed by the shapes of
riverbeds that ran across this landscape
as much as 500 million years ago
in the middle of the period known as the
cambrian
during this period the planet earth
would have looked like a very alien
place almost like the surface of another
planet
there were a few plants like mosses and
lichens but no leaves or trees and no
animals on the bare rocky land
the sea levels were high with little or
no polar ice and so large areas of the
continents were flooded with warm
shallow seas
filled with some of the largest forms of
life to yet have evolved crustaceans and
arthropods like trilobites
over the hundreds of millions of years
that followed an enormous amount of sand
was deposited on the floors of these
oceans as their waves ground away at the
rocks of the planet crust as rain waters
flowed down through rivers bringing silt
and dust along with them
today the um ishrin layer of sandstone
is more than half a kilometer thick
and in most places it is buried by
sheets of younger grey limestone
this rosy sandstone would have remained
buried if it weren't for the unique
plate tectonics of the arabian peninsula
the arabian plate is currently being
crushed by the other plates around it
the much larger african and eurasian
plates
it's being pushed north at a rate of 15
millimeters a year
or about as fast as your fingernails
grow
as it does so these enormous forces have
thrown up mountain ranges in turkey
syria and iran
and this vice-like pressure has caused
the land mass to tilt
all of the rock layers in jordan now
slope gently towards the northeast the
upper limestone layer became exposed to
the powerful forces of the wind and sand
in places like wadi ram dhana the
eastern shore of the dead sea and at the
site of petra
these grey sandstones eroded away
and the long buried layers of um ishrin
sandstone came into view in all their
rich red glory
and it's here in this landscape of rosy
red stone that the story of the
nabateans would begin
the earliest hints of a people who may
have been the nabataeans comes from the
sources of the late kings of assyria in
the 8th and 7th centuries bc
like many rulers of this region before
them they had struggled to control the
nomadic tribal peoples living in the
deserts to their south
the 7th century bc assyrian king's
sennacherib wrote the following
inscription detailing one of his
campaigns in the south
in my first campaign
i accomplished the defeat of merodak
baladan king of babylonia together with
the army of
his ally in the plane of kish
on my return march the tamuna the ubudu
the damanu the nabatu who were not
submissive at all
all of them i conquered
sennacherib's grandson the king ashur
banipal also wrote of encountering these
desert peoples
live in a far-off desert place where
there are no wild animals and not even
birds build their nests
today many scholars dismiss the
similarities between the name of the
ancient nabatu and the later nabataeans
as a simple coincidence
but what we do know is that since the
earliest history of this region people
have lived in this kind of nomadic
manner in the deserts of arabia
these people would have no fixed towns
or cities no houses or temples but they
would move with their herds constructing
tents wherever they went and moving as
restlessly as the desert sands
they would survive by raising animals
like goats sheep and cows which could
provide meat milk and wool
they would forage and hunt what they
could from the environment and would
perhaps plant orchards that they would
return to each year on their wandering
routes
it seems that during their early history
the nabataeans would also act as pirates
and bandits using their knowledge of the
desert to outmaneuver the slow-moving
trade caravans that passed through their
territory and along their coast
the first century roman writer strabo
recounts that the nabataeans even
dabbled in seabourn piracy
[Music]
nabataea is a country with a large
population and well supplied with
pasturage
they also dwell on ireland situated off
the coast nearby
and these nabataeans formally lived a
peaceful life
but later
by means of rafts went to plundering the
vessels of people sailing from egypt
but they paid the penalty when a fleet
went over
and sacked their country
soon it seems that the nabataeans
discovered that it was more profitable
not to rob the trade caravans but to
offer them protection to pass through
their territory for a price
and from there it was only one small
step to organizing the caravans
themselves
by the end of the first millennium bc
the nabataeans had pushed out their
rivals and now dominated the business of
transporting goods across the deserts of
arabia
by the time the first books of the
hebrew bible were being written down
it's clear that the arab kingdoms of the
south were already making a killing
in the book of kings 10 15 the following
account is made of the wealth of the
10th century king solomon with
particular mention of the wealth of the
arab kingdoms
now the weight of gold that came to
solomon in one year
was 600 threescore and six talents of
gold
beside that he had of the merchantmen
and of the traffic of the spice
merchants and of all the kings of arabia
and of the governors of the country
the first truly solid account of the
nabataeans comes second hand from around
the year 312 bc
and the greek writer known as hieronymus
of cardia
hieronymus wrote an apparently detailed
description of the nabatean people
expounding on their history their
culture and their way of life but
unfortunately for us that text hasn't
survived into the modern day
but he was used as a major source for
other later scholars like the greek
historian diodorus of sicily writing
more than 300 years later
in his work diodorus gives a lengthy
description of the nabateans based on
the earlier observations of hieronymus
of cardia
he paints a picture of an uncompromising
nomadic people who refused the comforts
of settled society out of a desire for
independence
for the sake of those who do not know it
will be useful to state in some detail
the customs of these arabs by following
which it is believed they preserve their
liberty
they range over a country that is partly
desert and partly waterless though a
small section of it is fruitful
they live in the open air claiming as
native land a wilderness that has
neither rivers nor abundant springs from
which it is possible for a hostile army
to obtain water it is their custom
neither to plant grain set out any
fruit-bearing tree use wine nor
construct any house and if anyone is
found acting contrary to this death is
his penalty
they follow this custom because they
believe that those who possess these
things are in order to retain the use of
them easily compelled by the powerful to
do their bidding
diodorus also recounts the great wealth
that the nabataeans had amassed due to
their control of crucial trade routes
for spices and incense
some of them raised their camels others
sheep pasturing them in the desert
while there are many arab tribes who use
the desert as pasture the nabataeans far
surpass the others in wealth although
they are not much more than ten thousand
in number for not a few of them are
accustomed to bring down to the sea
frankincense and myrrh and the most
valuable kinds of spices which they
procure from those who convey them
frankincense and myrrh are the resins of
two different plants in the burserakai
family
nulled and stunted trees that grow on
the arabian peninsula
in india and north africa
when the bark of these trees is damaged
they have evolved to release resin from
their wounds which forms a glassy seal
protecting the plant's delicate insides
from further harm
but trees are also susceptible to
bacterial infections just like we are
and as an extra line of defense these
resins are filled with volatile
compounds that kill bacteria and fungi
similar to our own immune system
it's these volatile chemicals that also
act in interesting ways on the human
sense of smell
and for at least the last five thousand
years these resins have been used for
their antibacterial properties in
medicine and for their striking aromas
when burned
frankincense releases a sweet and woody
scent with notes of lemon
well myrrh releases a smell that is more
like spice bitterer with floral
overtones
at harvest times farmers slice gashes
into the barks of the trees and collect
the milky resins that ooze from within
once exposed to air and sun myrrh dries
and hardens to reddish brown pea-sized
chunks
while frankincense dries to pale yellow
tear-shaped droplets
diodorus of sicily even claims that the
smells were so strong
that sailors traveling up the coast of
arabia
could smell them as they sailed past
a group of greek sailors who ran out of
supplies on the arabian coast around the
year 300 a.d
landed on the shore in search of water
and stumbled upon a plantation of these
trees
they were later interviewed by the
botanist theophrastis who wrote down
everything they told him about the
methods of extracting these resins
they said that on the coasting voyage
they landed to look for water on the
mountains and saw these trees and the
manner of collecting their gums
they reported that with both trees
incisions had been made
both in the stems and in the branches
also that in some cases the gum was
dropping but that in others it remained
sticky to the tree and that in some
places mats woven of palm leaves were
put underneath
while that which remained sticky to the
trees they scraped off with iron tools
the cultivation of these trees was
veiled in secrecy and this secrecy gave
rise to outlandish myths
the historian herodotus writing in the
5th century bc
recorded the process for harvesting
these incenses
along with an account of a supposed race
of monsters that guarded them
arabia is the furthest of the inhabited
lands in the direction of the midday
and in it alone of all lands grow
frankincense and myrrh
these are got with difficulty by the
arabians
for these trees which produce
frankincense are guarded by winged
serpents
small in size and of various colors
which watch in great numbers about each
tree
and they cannot be driven away from the
trees by any other thing but only the
smoke of the storax
we will never know whether this was a
simple legend or whether it was a
purposeful piece of disinformation
spread by arab frankincense farmers to
scare others away from their lucrative
industry
if this latter was the case then it
seems to have worked
the stories of venomous flying snakes
were repeated by a number of other
ancient greek writers and few of those
who explored the coast of arabia by sea
were ever brave enough to venture inland
to see the incense plantations for
themselves
and it's not hard to see
why these commodities were so sought
after
towns and cities of the bronze and iron
age would likely have been a potent mix
of pungent smells
even in the most refined cities
sanitation was in its early stages if it
existed at all
and little centralized planning would
often mean that waste would build up
close to where people lived and worked
with no refrigeration food would spoil
quickly and industries like leather
tanning used dung and urine to produce
their products
all of this would have combined to
create a heady assault on the noses of
all the people who lived there
and for the rich alleviating this
discomfort was something they were
willing to pay for
aside from this obvious use the burning
of incense also took on a significant
spiritual dimension
temples and places of religious worship
wanted to create a clear divide between
the inside of the temple a holy sacred
space and the dirty smelly world outside
and incense was one of the best ways to
do this
since ancient times people had noticed
the connection between bad smells and
illness and death
our sense of smell evolved in part to
protect us from harmful bacteria in
waste and decaying matter
and so naturally people noticed that
those who lived close to foul smelling
places like sewers and waste heaps would
get sick more often and even die
since the earliest texts have been
recorded it's clear that people
considered the presence of bad smells to
be evidence of the existence of evil
spirits invisible to the eye but
lingering in the air waiting to cause
disease and misery to the people around
them
a large part of the responsibility of a
temple was to give people comfort from
the daily horrors of disease and
misfortune
and to do this they would need to create
a space where these putrid smells and
the evil associated with them were not
allowed entry
this use of incense to create a sense of
holy space is truly ancient
it was mentioned as part of rituals in
homer's odyssey and the book of exodus
even describes a particular blend of
frankincense and other spices to be
ground and burnt in the sacred altar
before the ark of the covenant and even
goes so far as to forbid its use for any
other purpose
then the lord said to moses
take fragrant spices gum resin onika and
galbanum
and pure frankincense all in equal
amounts
and make a fragrant blend of incense the
work of a
perfumer it is to be salted and pure
and sacred
grind some of it to a powder and place
it in front of the ark of the covenant
law in the tent of meeting
it shall be most holy to you
do not make any incense with this
formula for yourselves
whoever makes incense like it to enjoy
its fragrance must be cut off from their
people
[Music]
from this connection to the divine
incense would soon become integral to
the function of royalty
myrrh was used in the anointing rituals
of hebrew queens and in the embalming
process for the mummies of egyptian
pharaohs
in the christian new testament the
gospel of matthew describes a group of
wise men who travel from the east to
attend the birth of jesus and who bring
him the traditional offerings given to
royalty
gold frankincense and myrrh
gifts designed to reinforce his claim to
being born as king of the jews and the
descendant of king david
in other words incense around this time
was serious business
these fragrances were not simply
frivolous luxuries but they were
essential tools in the way that
religious authority and the power of the
state were constructed
as societies became more centralized and
these institutions grew in power and
wealth the demand for incense would only
increase
as the second and first centuries bc
passed by the nabataean people found
themselves at the very heart of this
crucial industry
camels would soon lumber across the
nabatean roads with boxes of
frankincense and myrrh from oman sacks
of spices from india and bolts of cloth
from syria
as well as sugar and ivory from africa
and all of this would pass through a
city that sat at the crossroads of
multiple trade routes a place that would
come to hold a semi-mythical reputation
around the known world
to the nabataeans this city was known as
the rakam
but to the people of the wider world it
would come to be known by the greek word
for rock the element from which it was
carved
this was the city of petra
the site of petra has been inhabited for
at least the last 7 000 years and this
is partly due to its interesting geology
a freshwater spring rises from the
ground here known as moosa's spring and
it's held in traditional beliefs to be
the place where the biblical figure
moses once struck a rock with his staff
and caused water to gush from the desert
stones
and the appearance of a spring of water
in this arid desert really must have
seemed miraculous to the early peoples
who settled here as rain waters permeate
through these porous sandstones they
gather in subterranean pools and these
waters slowly leech out of the rocks
along the paths of least resistance this
means that the very stones of petra's
landscape act like enormous water towers
slowly releasing their stores of water
through the long dry months of the
arabian summer
over millions of years
these spring waters along with the brief
but heavy winter rains have cut through
the sandstone bluffs so that a narrow
ravine known as a sikh wound its way
through the solid stone
beyond this was a perfectly enclosed
area
sheltered by high cliffs from the desert
wind and sands
and with a constant supply of fresh
water
the first century roman author and
naturalist pliny the elder gives one
early account of the city in his work
natural history
the napatians inhabit a town named petra
it lies in a deep valley in little less
than two miles wide and is surrounded by
inaccessible mountains with a river
flowing between them
at petra two roads meet
its distance from the town of gaza on
the mediterranean coast is 600 miles and
from the persian gulf is
635 miles
this naturally occurring spring water
was enough to support a small population
but as the city's importance grew and
the trade caravans got larger the strain
on its supply must have grown and grown
to enhance the natural water systems of
the region the nabataeans began to build
complex water control systems cutting
aqueducts into the sandstone of the
mountains and even building underground
plumbing systems out of terracotta pipes
to divert the water of several nearby
springs directly into the heart of the
settlement
and they also learned techniques for
gathering rainfall that they used to
enormous effect
although the climate of the region
wasn't quite as arid 2 000 years ago as
it is today this landscape was still a
desert
rain in these parts came extremely
rarely
and the so-called rainy season around
january could consist of just one or two
spells of rain in a year in the height
of summer rainfall stops entirely
and so the nabataeans worked tirelessly
to maximize the amount of water they
could gather during these few rainy
spells
rainwater would naturally gather in
depressions and hollows and for
centuries herdsmen had taken advantage
of these natural pools
but sandstone is a porous rock and the
water would naturally drain away over
time
to fix this problem the nabataeans
worked to line these natural pools with
hard stucco plaster
meaning that the water would remain and
could be used long into the season of
drought
they built large dams across the valleys
to gather rainwater into reservoirs and
also reduce the flooding that occurred
each year as rainwater followed the
well-worn channels it had cut for
millions of years through the red rock
of the valley
the nabatean's expert control of scarce
water resources meant that petra was
able to grow to eventually house as many
as 20 000 permanent residents
and to support the constant arrival of
large trading caravans many of them made
up of hundreds of people and camels
arriving thirsty from the long desert
roads
and soon the water was even abundant
enough that it could be used for more
luxurious purposes
the citizens of petra would soon be able
to bathe make wine cultivate fruit and
stroll through their streets in the
shade of palm trees
archaeology shows that petra was not
just a city of tombs
in its time of flourishing it was
sprawling with lush gardens and pleasant
fountains enormous temples and luxurious
villas
the roman writer strabo gives some
glimpse of this
the metropolis of the nabataeans is
petra as it is called for it lies on a
site which is otherwise smooth and level
but it is fortified all around by a rock
the outside parts of the site being
precipitous and sheer and the inside
parts having springs in abundance both
for domestic purposes and for watering
gardens
outside the circuit of the rock most of
the territory is desert in particular
towards judea
and some of the nabateans own
inscriptions clearly reference gardens
existing within the city
the following inscription from a tomb at
petra illustrates some of the
flourishing plant life that once stood
here and which may have belonged to a
temple
and its description stands in stark
contrast to the barren sand and stones
that today stretch out around it
this tomb and the large burial chamber
within it and the small burial chamber
beyond it the enclosure in front of them
and the porticos and the rooms within it
and the gardens and pleasure garden and
the walls of water and the system and
walls and all the rest of the property
which in these places are sacred and
dedicated to douchera the god of our
lord
and his sacred throne and all the gods
outside the city in the surrounding
countryside
water control was even more crucial even
with enough water the nabataeans still
needed to eat and to do so they would
employ a unique style of farming that
maximized the potential of the difficult
terrain
they would contour a large area of the
land digging it out into a shallow
funnel sloping down to a single point
and at this point they would plant a
single fruit tree
when the rains came the water would
drain down to this central point and the
tree could survive to plant an orchard
of trees using this method you need
about 50 times the normal space but it
was an effective technique and out here
in the desert one thing the nabataeans
had no shortage of was space
the nabataeans also used their expertise
at water control to enormous strategic
advantage
diodorus of sicily recounts how they
built a system of secret hidden
reservoirs across the desert meaning
that only they could take advantage of
them ensuring that no competitors could
move in on their lucrative trade routes
and in times of war their secret
reservoirs also gave them an advantage
against their enemies
as diodrus recalls
they are exceptionally fond of freedom
and whenever a strong force of enemies
comes near they take refuge in the
desert using this as a fortress for it
lacks water and cannot be crossed by
others but to them alone
since they have prepared subterranean
reservoirs lined with stucco the mouths
of which they make very small after
filling these reservoirs with rainwater
they close the openings making them even
with the rest of the ground and they
leave signs that are known to themselves
but are unrecognizable by others they
water their cattle every other day so
that if they flee through waterless
places they may not need a continuous
supply of water
but despite the immense difficulties of
maintaining this city its position meant
it was all worth it
that's because petra sat at the center
of a spider's web of trade routes
spreading off in every direction
to the east desert roads led to the port
towns of basra and
in the persian gulf where spices from
east asia like cinnamon vanilla ginger
nutmeg and pepper flowed as well as
precious stones from india and fine
silks from china
from the south frankincense and myrrh
poured into petra from the incense
fields of yemen and oman
petra connected the nearby red sea port
of akbar with the mediterranean port
town of gaza connecting the markets of
eastern africa with those of europe
and on the roads to the north lay the
great cities of damascus and antioch
to the west the roads led from petra
into egypt where tin was in constant
demand brought from afghanistan along
with the brilliant blue stone lapis
lazuli
the black volcanic glass obsidian was
brought from
abyssinia perfumes and scented oils as
well as cosmetic powders and eye shadows
flowed north to greece stored in
containers carved from giant clam shells
harvested in the red sea
the tarry's substance bitumen was farmed
from the dead sea and brought south to
egypt to help in the embalming process
for mummies and to waterproof the hulls
of ships
the nabataeans were so crucial to the
transferring of all of these goods by
land and sea that they were able to
charge attacks equal to a full quarter
of all the goods that passed through
their lands as a result the nabataeans
would soon grow fabulously even absurdly
wealthy
but soon others would start to look with
jealous eyes to the fortune they had
made
the nabataeans were not a warrior people
and it seems that they preferred
wherever possible not to fight
but they were more than capable of
defending themselves when attacked as
one colorful episode from their history
shows
the society of the nabataeans rose into
a world that still bore the marks of one
of history's most dramatic reshufflings
of power
towards the end of the 4th century bc
the 20-year-old king alexander of the
mountainous kingdom of macedon in
northern greece had embarked on a
10-year campaign that would see him
topple the persian empire and sweep
eastwards to capture vast swathes of
territory throughout central asia even
invading india
alexander died in the year 323 bc in the
city of babylon and his empire
immediately disintegrated
he left in his wake a series of large
greek kingdoms stretching from pakistan
to egypt and each of these began
fighting with one another over who would
rule the remnants of the empire
one of these kingdoms was ruled by a
king antigonus who had been a general
under alexander and who had served him
as governor of much of the middle east
antigonus had lost an eye after
apparently being struck by shrapnel from
a splintering catapult bolt while
serving under alexander's father and so
he has gone down in history by the name
antigonus monophthalmus or antigonus the
one eyed
antigonus was also monomaniacal
he soon embarked on a determined
campaign to reunite alexander's great
empire and rule over it himself he
quickly swept through syria taking the
lands of his rivals and conquered down
the mediterranean coast
eventually reaching the borders of the
wealthy lands of the nabataeans
war is an expensive business and as with
most war mongers antigonus was
permanently short of money
soon he began to look hungrily to the
south and dreamed of seizing the fabled
wealth of petra for himself
in the year 312 bc he ordered one of his
generals a man named athenius to march
into the desert and seize as much as he
could of the wealth of these nabataean
traders
the disciplined and battle-hardened
phalanxes of antigonus were among the
best soldiers in the world some having
served under alexander himself and these
crack troops don't seem to have expected
much of a challenge
athenius marched out into the desert
from judea with an army made up of 4 000
foot soldiers armed with long pikes and
600 horsemen
as diodorus of sicily recounts
deciding that this people was hostile to
his interests he selected one of his
friends athenius and gave him 4 000
lightfoot soldiers and 600 horsemen
fitted for speed and ordered him to set
upon the barbarians suddenly and cut off
all their cattle as plunder
it took athenius and his soldiers three
days to travel the 160 kilometers across
the desert
but soon they came into view of the
legendary stone city
athenius ordered his men to prepare for
a nighttime
attack we can imagine the sight of the
greek army waiting and watching
as the shadows stretched long over the
rosy stones of the city and the sun sat
in a purpley haze over the jordanian
desert
when night fell
the soldiers stormed into the city
they found it almost completely
undefended
there seems to have been no permanent
garrison guarding the city of petra and
the nabatean men were away on business
what followed was a frenzy of looting
and here we can get a sense for the vast
wealth that had been amassed in this
city
athenius and his men loaded themselves
with as much frankincense and myrrh as
their animals could carry and reportedly
made away with nearly 14 tons of silver
not content with that they also rounded
up all of the women and children they
could and abducted them with the
intention of selling them as slaves
as diodrus recalls
of those that were caught there
some me slew at once some he took as
prisoners and others who were wounded he
left behind
and of the frankincense and myrrh he
gathered together the larger part and
about 500 talents of silver
the greeks hardly believing how easy it
had been
marched off with their slaves and loot
as fast as they could and made their way
back along the road to safety
weighed down with treasure and prisoners
and with their horses no doubt
struggling in the desert landscape they
traveled about 36 kilometers from petra
and thought that there would be safe to
make camp but they had not reckoned on
the camel-powered armies of the
nabataeans
only a few hours after athenius and his
soldiers had left petra the first
nabataean men began to return to the
city
finding its houses and temples looted
and their wives and children gone they
heard about the greek attack from
wounded survivors and began an immediate
pursuit
they sent out riders and gathered more
men from every village they passed
through until the nabataean force had
swollen to a horde of eight thousand
camel riders
they loped across the desert with
exceptional speed
easily outpacing the greek horses and
caught up to athenius's camp by
nightfall
while the men of athanius were encamped
with little thought of the enemy and
because of their weariness were in deep
sleep
some of their prisoners escaped secretly
and the nabataeans learning from them
the condition of the enemy attacked the
camp at about the third watch being no
less than eight thousand in number
under cover of darkness the enraged
nabataeans swept into the greek camp and
slaughtered everyone they could find
most of the hostile troops they
slaughtered where they lay
the rest they slew with their javelins
as they awoke and sprang to arms
in the end
all the foot soldiers were slain
but of the horsemen about 50 escaped and
of these the larger part were wounded
when the nabataeans had manfully
punished the enemy they themselves
returned to the rock with the property
that they had recovered
[Music]
every single greek foot soldier was
killed and only about 50 of the greek
cavalry were able to flee the scene and
trickle back across the desert
for the greeks this was an incredible
humiliation
but it's clear the nabataeans had no
interest in fighting a war
they sent a message to king antigonus in
aramaic the common language of the
ancient middle east explaining why they
had wiped out his army and asking for no
further aggression against them
the embarrassed greek king clearly tried
his best to save face
to antigonus they wrote a letter in
syrian characters in which they accused
ethanius and vindicated themselves
antigonus replied to them agreeing that
they had been justified in defending
themselves but he found fault with
athanius saying that he made the attack
contrary to the instructions he had been
given
he did this
hiding his own intentions and desiring
to delude the barbarians into a sense of
security
the arabs were highly pleased because
they seemed to have been relieved of
great fears yet they did not altogether
trust the words of antigonus
regarding their prospects as uncertain
they placed watchmen upon the hills from
which it was easy to see from a great
distance that passes into arabia
this final act of caution seems to have
been completely justified in fact king
antigonus had no intention of
maintaining the peace
or accepting defeat at the hands of a
people he considered to be barbarians
he ordered his son demetrius to march
back into the nabataean lands and
accomplish what athenius could not
this time with another four thousand
foot soldiers and a much larger force of
4 000 cavalry
but demetrius would not have much more
success
the watchman that the nabataeans had
placed along their borders quickly
spotted the advancing greeks and lit
warning beacons on the hilltops
the desert people scattered their flocks
hiding them away in narrow crevices and
hidden places and took all of their
precious goods women and children with
them
they all fled to a stoney fortress
possibly a flat-topped mountain named um
the tallest point around the city of
petra
demetrius on arriving at the rock and
finding that the flocks had been removed
made repeated assaults upon the
stronghold
those within resisted stoutly and easily
had the upper hand because of the height
of the place
and so on this day after he had
continued the struggle until evening he
recalled his soldiers by a trumpet call
the greek general demetrius was clearly
frustrated
the single narrow approach up to the
mountain's stronghold made a direct
attack on it virtually impossible and
it's clear that at least someone among
the nabataeans had a gift with words
as demetrius approached the next day for
a fresh round of assaults
someone called down from the walls with
the following impassioned plea
which diodorus of sicily recounts
on the next day however when he had
advanced upon the rock one of the
barbarians called to him saying king
demetrius with what desire or under what
compulsion do you war against us who
live in the desert and in a land that
has neither water nor grain
nor wine nor any other thing whatever of
those that pertain to the necessities of
life among you for we
since we are in no way willing to be
slaves have all taken refuge in a land
that lacks all the things that are
valued among other peoples and have
chosen to live a life in the desert
harming you not at all
we therefore beg both you and your
father to do us no injury
but after receiving gifts from us to
withdraw your army and henceforth regard
the nabataeans as your friends
for neither can you if you wish remain
here many days since you lack water and
all other necessary supplies nor can you
force us to live a different life
here we can see the nabataeans deploying
both of their great strengths
their strategic control of the water
secreted away in hidden reservoirs meant
that any protracted siege of the city
was impossible
and their enormous wealth often meant
that they could simply pay off their
enemies
demetrius must have sensed that the
siege was hopeless
he agreed to accept a payment from the
nabataeans and marched back to his lands
not exactly victorious but at least a
good deal richer
his father king antigonus seems to have
been quite angry at his son's decision
as diodorus relates
antigonus when demetrius returned and
made a detailed report of what he had
done rebuked him for the treaty with the
nabataeans saying that he had made the
barbarians much bolder by leaving them
unpunished
since it would seem to them that they
had gained pardon not through his
kindness
but through his inability to overcome
them
this episode gives us a marvelous
glimpse of the unique survival strategy
that the nabataeans employed
and shows how they built an empire not
out of conquest and death but out of the
trickle of fresh water from the desert
rocks and the endless clinking of silver
pieces moving across the desert from
hand to hand
in telling the story of the nabataeans
there will be one voice conspicuously
missing
and that is the voice of the nabataeans
themselves
as far as we can tell
the nabataeans had a good level of
literacy and it seems even common people
could read and write to some extent
the nabatean script is a kind of late
aramaic ultimately derived from what's
called imperial aramaic which was used
by the persian empire
we have evidence of graffiti written on
stones all over the jordanian desert
some apparently left by shepherds
who were capable of writing at least
their own names and some short
inscriptions
but despite this apparently widespread
literacy no histories or accounts
actually written by nabateans have
survived
we may never know the reasons for this
it's possible that the tribal roots of
nabatean society meant that they had
inherited a caste of oral historians and
storytellers whose job it was to
memorize their histories and recite them
and that while these storytellers were
alive it simply never seemed necessary
to write those histories down it's
possible that oral historians of this
kind may even have jealously guarded
their histories even forbidden them from
being written down in order to preserve
their own importance and status
but all of this is speculation and for
the most part all the nabataeans have
left us on this matter is silence
the almost complete lack of nabataen's
sources means that to tell their story
we are left searching through the
written records of other societies
looking for any mention of them
these mentions are often brief and
fragmentary and form instantaneous
flashball moments in which the
nabataeans appear suddenly in the
historical record and then disappear
again into darkness
about fifty years after the incident
with antigonus the one-eyed and his two
failed invasions of nabataea we get a
colorful account from the papyrus
archives of an egyptian politician named
xenon a right-hand man to the minister
of finance in ptolemaic egypt around 259
bc
one papyrus gives the account of a
chariot driver who had seen two of his
colleagues have an uncomfortable run-in
with a group of nabataeans these two
greek chariot drivers had apparently
been moonlighting as human traffickers
transporting slave girls and selling
them in the cities they visited
memorandum to zenon from heraclides the
charioteer
regarding what was done by dreamless and
dionysius to the slave girl abusing her
and handing her over to a border guard
returning from there he encountered the
nebutians
and when there was a shout of protest he
was put under guard and placed in
shackles for seven days
concerning further details if you
question me
you will learn the entire truth
this remarkable and enigmatic entry
leaves us with a lot of questions but it
shows that the nabataeans were already
familiar figures right across the middle
east
it's not clear what caused the
nabataeans to utter their shout of
protest and imprisoned these men
perhaps it was some personal insult or a
dispute over trade
but some historians have wondered
whether it shows that the nabataeans
were offended by the men's treatment of
the women in their captivity and decided
to dole out some justice of their own
nabataean culture seems to have held
women in high regard with queens
appearing alongside kings on certain
coins and with tomb inscriptions
describing women acting as the heads of
households
and so it's not far-fetched to imagine
that the greeks treatment of these women
may have offended the nabataeans
cultural sensibilities
another tantalizing flashbulb comes from
the records of the roman jewish
historian flavius josephus in his
account of the jewish maccabee revolt
against the seleucid empire nearly a
hundred years later
the revolt was led by a jewish priest
named judas macabeus and at one point he
and his brother jonathan fled from
seleucid forces across the river jordan
at this point josephus recounts how the
brothers and their rebel forces ran into
a group of nabataeans
these nabataeans met them on friendly
terms and even warned them about
atrocities the seleucids had been
committing in a nearby jewish settlement
now as for judas maccabees and his
brother jonathan
they passed over the river jordan and
when they had gone three days journey
they lighted upon the nabataeans who
came to meet them peaceably
and who told them how the affairs of
those in the land of gilead stood and
how many of them were in distress
and driven into garrisons and into the
cities of galilee and exhorted him to
make haste to go against the foreigners
and to endeavor to save his own
countrymen out of their hands
to this exhortation judas hearkened and
returned to the wilderness
and in the first place
fell upon the inhabitants of bosa and
took the city
again this fragmentary glimpse is
fascinating but frustrating the
nabataeans seem to have had a
long-standing friendly relationship with
the judean people and were apparently
supportive of their rebellion
it's possible that the nabataeans
clearly valuing their own independence
viewed the judean struggle for freedom
with a great deal of sympathy
but no doubt they also enjoyed the
opportunity to cause trouble for the
seleucid empire their powerful rivals to
the north
an inscription at the archaeological
site of haluza in the negev desert
contains the first mention of the name
of a king of nabataea
this inscription written in a very early
form of nabatean says only the following
this is the place which nitairu made for
the life of king aratas king of the
nabataeans
this king aratus was the first king of
nabataea that we can definitively put a
name to and it's clear that by this time
nabataea was not just a tribal
confederacy but actually a kingdom
half a century later by the year 129 bc
we get another flashbulb
showing that petra was now recognized as
a major regional capital
one inscription from a greek ambassador
named moschio son of kidamos came from
the city of priyena in modern-day turkey
it recounts how mosquian travelled on
diplomatic missions around the region
and mentions two cities in the same
breath
the great city of alexandria in egypt
and the city of petra
he acted as an envoy on behalf of the
people on many occasions
both to kings and to cities and he
performed all these embassies to the
advantage of the people
the previous embassies he performed as a
free gift but when he was sent by his
fatherland on official business to king
ptolemaeus in alexandria and to petra in
arabia
he stayed there for a longer time than
had been anticipated by the people
it's clear that by this time the tribal
peoples of nabataea had grown into a
true regional power and gained the
respect of their neighbors
they now directly controlled territory
across the arabian peninsula into the
negev desert and across palestine but
their zone of influence stretched even
further
their caravans arrived in countless
cities laden with goods and crossed the
seas to trade with faraway lands
and as the power of the nabateans grew
so did the magnificence of their stony
capital
petra was now a hive of construction
with its people carving temples and
tombs directly imitating the
architectural styles of their powerful
greek neighbors
and it's around this time during the
first century bc that the people of
petra would construct the most
impressive monument from their unique
culture of sandstone carving
that's the enormous edifice known today
as the khasnae or the great treasury
[Music]
the towering construction known as the
khasnae is today one of the most famous
buildings in the world
it's thought to have been the mausoleum
of a nabataean king possibly eratus ii
oberdas iii or his successor eratus iv
but no inscriptions stand beside this
enormous carving to explain its purpose
or who built it
today the khasnae stands as a silent
testimony to the golden age of the
nabatean kingdom and it seems at every
point to have been designed for maximum
impact on those who saw it
ancient visitors to petra would walk
along the narrow gully of the sikh
winding through the towering walls of
sandstone
and finally emerge into this spectacle
of sheer visual drama
the towering colonnades and galleries of
the facade a site that still has its
intended impact on modern tourists to
this day
more than two millennia after its
designers walked the earth
at the time it was built the ground
level beneath the khasnae was about four
meters lower than it is today and a
steep staircase led up to its pillared
doorway
the design of the khasnae marries the
nabatean art of stone carving with greek
architectural styles
depicting nabatean gods alongside greek
deities like taiki god of fortune and
cities and egyptian gods like isis
it's clear that in this hybrid style the
people of petra were laying claim to a
status equal to the greek empires that
surrounded them and marking their city
as one of the great metropolises of the
world
the monument was carved using iron
pickaxes and chisels and today you can
still see the marks left by the
scaffolding of the workers who toiled
through endless hours and dangerous
conditions to bring its perfect
proportions into existence
when the chasne was built it would have
been remarkable to the citizens of petra
who had never seen anything like it in
their city
but in the coming century the building
would act as a model for several more
monuments
among these are the stone facades known
as the monastery and another named the
corinthian tomb but both of these
monuments are smaller less ambitious and
less beautifully proportioned than the
towering facade of the khasnae
thanks to visitors who passed through in
the coming centuries we do know a great
amount about what the average citizen of
petra would have experienced in their
everyday life
the first century greek writer and
geographer strabo recounts the foods
enjoyed by the nabataeans
most of the country is well supplied
with fruits except the olive they use
sesame oil instead
the sheep are white fleeced and the oxen
are large but the country produces no
horses
camels afford the service they require
instead of horses
we can also find a reference to a
particular kind of fermented bread known
as hubs alma al-nabati or nabataean
water bread in a 10th century cookbook
by ibn sayar al-warak
take seven and a half pounds of good
quality sumid flour
and sift it in a big wooden bowl mix it
with three ounces yeast and add three
ounces salt that has been dissolved in
water and strained
knead the mixture into a very firm dough
as firm as stone and press it well cover
the dough and let it ferment
with the help of some oil of whole
sesame seeds
divide the dough into portions
light the tinur
and wait until the fire starts to
smolder gently
rub each portion of the dough with two
dirham sesame oil or olive oil
then
flatten it by hand and stick it to the
inside of a smoldering oven
it's likely that the nabataeans would
have done their baking early in the
morning before the heat of the day would
make lighting a fire unbearable we can
imagine the smoke of these fires
drifting through the shaded gullies of
the city in the cool desert mornings the
smells of baking bread yeast and
sizzling sesame oil filling the air
according to sources of the time walking
the streets of petra would have been a
colorful experience
the writer strabo recounts the many
coloured clothes of the city's
inhabitants and the many smells that
would have wafted through the streets
they go without tunics with girdles
around their loins and with slippers on
their feet even the kings though in
their case the color is purple
some things are imported wholly from
other countries but others not
altogether so especially in the case of
those that are native products as for
example gold and silver and most of the
aromatics whereas brass and iron as also
purple garb styrex crocus custardia
embossed works paintings and molded
works are not produced in their country
nabataean religion revolved mostly
around the worship of a god named
dushara
a kind of father god like the greek soos
who was responsible for justice and
seems to have been associated with the
sun
he was often represented by simple
square-shaped blocks of stone and there
seems to have been some anxiety about
representing him in any other fashion
nabataeans would apparently offer animal
sacrifices to dushara
and would give him offerings in the form
of petra's most abundant trade commodity
incense
they worship the sun
building an altar on top of the house
and pouring libations on it daily and
burning frankincense
no doubt the temples of petra would have
sent great clouds of frankincense myrrh
and other aromatics wafting out into its
streets to mix with the smells of camels
and goats cooking food and smoldering
charcoal ovens
many of the peoples of nabatea were
still transient travelling constantly
all year round from trade post to trade
post but in order to maintain a sense of
community it seems they did all gather
every year for a kind of festival part
market part ceremony and part feast
where the disparate tribes of the
nabataeans would come together to
exchange goods
talk tell stories and of course drink
wine
strabo describes the sights of one of
these nabataean celebrations
and he's struck by the noticeable lack
of slavery in the city something that
would have been remarkable to someone
who lived in the roman empire
but when the time draws near for the
national gathering at which those who
dwell round about are accustomed to meet
they travel to this meeting leaving on a
certain rock their possessions and their
old men also their women and their
children
since they have but few slaves they are
served by their kinsfolk for the most
part or by one another or by themselves
so that the custom extends even to their
kings
they prepare common meals together in
groups of 13 persons and they have two
girl singers for each banquet
the king holds many drinking bouts in
magnificent style but no one drinks more
than 11 cupfuls each time using a
different golden cup
the king is so democratic that in
addition to serving himself he sometimes
even serves the rest himself in his turn
[Music]
the fact that we have to largely rely on
the accounts of others when recreating
the daily lives of the nabataeans is
frustrating for any scholar of the
period but in fact the nabataeans did
leave behind one great body of
literature that's the inscriptions
carved into the stones of their great
tombs in their own distinctive script
many of the most complete of these can
be found at the site of hegra now in the
northwest of modern saudi arabia
hegera was founded by the nabataean king
eratus iv in the final years of the
first century bc and he named it the
kingdom's second capital
in some ways its carved tombs are more
dramatic and impressive than those at
petra since they can be seen from great
distances
looming on the horizon of the flat
desert plain
the most famous of these is known in
arabic as kasar al-farid or the lonely
castle
it is as finely carved as anything found
at petra and it forms a particularly
haunting monument to the city that once
stood here
now buried beneath the sands
[Music]
the tomb inscriptions of hegra are
remarkable texts
many of them are extremely weathered
since they have been exposed to the
desert winds for more than two thousand
years
but many are also perfectly clear and
legible
[Music]
these tomb inscriptions often contain
warnings of curses from the gods that
would land upon any tomb robbers but
they were also binding legal documents
ensuring that the tomb remained the
property of a single family down the
generations with infractions punishable
by fines
this inscription from one hegera tomb is
a prime example of this hybrid form
[Music]
this is the tomb and platform and
enclosure from which hoshabu son of
nephew son of al-quf the tamanite made
for himself and his children and habu
his mother
and rufu and afthiyu his sisters and
their children
inviable according to the nature of
inviability among the nabataeans and
salamines forever
and may dashara curse anybody who buries
in this tomb
anyone except those inscribed above
or sells it
or buys it or gives it in pledge or
leases it or makes a gift of it
or disposes of it
and whoever does other than what is
written above
shall be liable to the god to shara
for the full price of a thousand sellers
and to our lord king haritet
for the same amount
in the month of shibat
the thirteenth year of
king of the nabateens
lover of his people
inside the tomb the niches are marked
with a shorter inscription
these are the two burial niches of
hoshabu son of nafio
and abdulga and habu his children
and may he who separates night from day
curse whoever removes them forever
these tomb inscriptions all more or less
follow this format and while they are
limited in what they can teach us they
do take on a remarkable significance and
even poignancy when we consider that
these are the only texts left behind
actually written by nabateans
theirs is a culture whose only surviving
testament is their tombstones
in these brief carved messages we can
learn little glimmers of information
we learn about the names of their gods
and get some sense of how they thought
of them
we can hear nabatean names and sometimes
we can recreate their family trees their
wives and sisters and children
we can hear hints of a society in which
the temple and the king both held some
kind of independent authority and where
a complex legal system was enforced with
laws and fines
in some of these inscriptions credit is
even given to the masons who carved the
tomb giving some hint as to the
importance that these artists held in
this city of stone
[Music]
in the month of nisan the 36th year of
king of the nabataeans
love of his people after son of abdul
bodat and wabu son of afsa and
the masons made this tomb
since the professions of the people
buried in the tombs are usually listed
we also get a wonderful account of the
variety of ways that a nabatean could
make their living in the cities of hegra
and petra
malkian the omen
[Music]
the centurion
all of these people lived full lives in
the streets and markets and houses of
these cities they had friends families
lovers secrets and dreams and now all
that is left are the faded inscriptions
in stone
slowly disappearing under the desert
winds and rain
despite their centuries of domination of
trade in this region the nabataeans
would eventually encounter an enemy that
could neither be defeated nor bought off
that was a growing imperial power based
on a peninsula far off in the central
mediterranean that would soon expand to
its most enormous height
encompassing the entire mediterranean
sea
and the lands of arabia beyond
that was the power of rome
[Music]
by the end of the 1st century bc the
roman republic had given way to the
roman empire a confident expanding
military power
by this time rome had conquered judea
and installed a tyrannical puppet king
herod the great to rule it as a colony
in 30 bc
rome also conquered the greek kingdom of
ptolemaic egypt and brought roman
legions to the banks of the nile
and then
like so many empires before them the
romans began to look hungrily east to
the rich lands of navitia
and the incense fields of arabia
[Music]
rome was an enormous consumer of incense
roman temples burned frankincense and
myrrh as part of their rituals and with
the rapid growth of the empire these
temples would now stretch across all of
europe from tunisia to scotland from
morocco to mesopotamia
at the height of its trade
it's estimated that each year well over
a million kilograms of frankincense was
imported into the roman empire
considering the exorbitant 25
tax that the nabataeans charged on this
it's no wonder that the romans soon
began to consider ways of cutting out
the middleman and taking charge of the
incense trade themselves
in the year 26 bc the new roman emperor
augustus sent one of his prefects who
had been stationed in roman egypt to
explore the south of arabia accompanied
with a small expeditionary force
and to establish new direct trade routes
with the people who lived there
this man's name was alias gallus
the geographer strabo recalls the
purpose of this expedition
alias gallus conceived the purpose of
winning the arabians over to himself
or of subjugating them
another consideration was the report
which had prevailed from all time that
they were very wealthy and that they
sold aromatics and the most valuable
stones for gold and silver
but never expended with outsiders any
part of what they received in exchange
for he expected either to deal with
wealthy friends
or to master wealthy enemies
[Music]
curiously the nabataeans seemed all too
eager to help the romans on their
expedition
they even offered to send one of their
own people as a guide
he was encouraged also by the
expectation of assistance from the
nabateans since they were friendly and
promised to cooperate with him in every
way
considering that the nabataeans stood to
lose a great deal if galaxy's expedition
was a success the romans should perhaps
have been more suspicious of these
offers of help
but apparently they were not
the guide that the nabataean king sent
to help this roman expedition was a man
named soleus a cunning politician high
up in the nabatean establishment
soleus faced an unenviable task
he had to appear to cooperate with the
roman expedition so as not to arouse the
anger of the mighty empire but the
nabataean king had made quite clear that
the expedition must be a failure
trapped between the romans and his own
king sileus must have experienced
sleepless nights as he guided the roman
army through the deserts of arabia
strabo recounts how the mission unfolded
gala set out on the expedition but he
was deceived by the nabataean
administrator sileus
who although he had promised to be guide
on the march and to supply all needs and
to cooperate with him
acted treacherously in all things
and pointed out neither a safe voyage
along the coast
nor a safe journey by land
misguiding him through places that had
no roads
and by securities routes and through
regions destitute of everything
or along rocky shores that had no
harbours or through waters that were
shallow or full of submarine rocks
and particularly in places of that kind
the flood tides
and also the eptides
caused very great distress
it's clear that at every turn the
nabatean soleus worked to frustrate and
weaken alias gallis's expedition using
every deception available to him
after many experiences and hardships he
arrived in 14 days at lukikome in the
land of the nabateens
although he lost many of his boats
some of these being lost
crews and all on accounts of difficult
sailing
but not on account of any enemy
this was caused by the treachery of
sileus
who said that there was no way for an
army to go to lukey comey by land
and yet
camel traders travel back and forth from
petra to this place
in safety
and ease
the expedition of alias gallus would
take six months to work its weary way up
the coast of southern arabia suffering
from disease shipwrecks even eating
poisoned herbs and drinking tainted
water so that the soldiers suffered from
sickness and disease
they would travel around in circles
across the stony desert wastes and take
the longest possible routes along rough
terrain baking in the searing arabian
sun
suffering from heat stroke and fatigue
finally with only a fraction of his
original force remaining gallus was
forced to admit defeat
although he was within reach of his goal
he now feared that if he pushed on none
of them would survive and he feared that
the journey home would take another six
months
he ordered his men to turn around and
march back along the desert roads
and it's only on the way home that he
realized the trick that had been played
on him
he was indeed only two days journey from
the country that produced aromatics as
informed by his captives
but he used up six months time on his
marches because of bad guidance
and he realized the fact when he turned
back
when at last he had learned the plot
against him and had gone back by other
roads
on his return he accomplished the whole
journey within 60 days
he'd used up six months in his first
journey
it's not recorded whether soleus stuck
around to face the anger of the roman
commander or whether he slunk away in
the night
strabo recounts the sorry sight of the
expedition as it returned to its base in
alexandria empty-handed
fancy carried his army across the myers
harbour within 11 days
and with all who had been fortunate
enough to survive landed in alexandria
the rest he had lost not in wars but
from sickness and fatigue and hunger and
bad roads
for only seven men perished in war
for these reasons this expedition did
not profit us to a great extent in our
knowledge of these regions
for his part celaeus seems to have
returned to petra to a hero's welcome
the failure of this disastrous
expedition set rome back significantly
the empire would soon be convulsed by
civil wars and was soon far too
distracted to think about expanding any
further into arabia
soleus's actions would buy his people
more than a century of independence but
rome's civil wars would not last forever
and for the kingdom of nabataea the
writing was on the wall
as the first millennium bc
became the first millennium a.d
rome officially absorbed judea
mesopotamia and syria into its enormous
empire
nabatia gradually found itself
surrounded by this overwhelming power
and the era of its existence as an
independent kingdom was soon to come to
an end
the last king of the nabataeans was a
man named rabel ii
who had ruled for 36 years
when he died in the year 106 a.d the
roman emperor trajan ordered two legions
to march into the region and capture the
lands of nabataea
there doesn't seem to have been any
particular pretext for the invasion
rebel had a legitimate heir named obadas
who was ready to take the throne but
it's clear that rome didn't want to
waste its opening
the man who led this campaign was the
roman governor of syria a man named
cornelius palmer
under his command the third cyrenaica
legion moves north from egypt into petra
while the sixth ferrata legion a syrian
garrison unit moved south to occupy the
town of bostra
as far as we can tell the romans faced
little resistance
in fact the campaign was so
underwhelming that the roman historian
cassius dio normally a colorful and
detailed writer had only the following
to say about it
about this time
palma the governor of syria subdued the
part of arabia around petra and made it
subject to the romans
this sparse report is wedged in between
colorful accounts of trajan's campaigns
against the dacians and his spectacles
involving ten thousand gladiators
even the roman coins minted to celebrate
the victory seem to reflect the
understated nature of the campaign they
were marked with the words arabia ad
cuisita
rather than the more normal captor
for the romans arabia had not been
captured but simply
acquired
some units of the nabatean's elite royal
guard do seem to have resisted the
invaders
but for the most part the regular troops
saw no point in fighting the inevitable
roman legions marched into petra and the
age of nabatean independence finally
came to an end
rome would name the province they
founded there arabia petraeus after the
great city and the period of roman petra
began
from what we can tell it seems that for
the average citizen of the nabatean
kingdom the annexation by rome had
little effect on their lives at least at
first
the historian jane taylor describes the
situation
it was only the top management that
changed the governors and a handful of
officials
due course the old royal army was
absorbed into the roman auxiliary forces
as six portraying cohorts
a total of six thousand men
as for the non-military majority
landowners stonemasons ceramicists
scribes priests musicians jugglers or
minor officials most stayed where they
were paid their taxes to the new
authority
and pursued the accustomed daily pattern
of their lives more or less unchanged
usually when rome captured an area they
would set about immediately building new
aqueducts and water systems
but conspicuously in petra they left the
nabataean water system virtually
untouched
this suggests that they saw little room
for improvement to the already skillful
engineering
to ensure the security of their new
conquest and perhaps with bitter
memories of alias galaxy's expedition
still in their minds the romans built a
highway through the entire territory
they named this the via nova trajana or
trajan's new road a 400 kilometer
highway connecting petra and bostra to
the sea port of akabar on the red sea
the road was lined with forts ensuring a
permanent control of the trade routes to
the rich incense fields of the south
and meaning that the romans could now
move their forces with ease
one roman citizen alias aristides who
lived during the second century a.d
in the roman province of asia wrote the
following description of the times and
shows that the romans believed that the
uncontrollable lands of arabia had
finally been pacified
wars have so far vanished as to be
legendary affairs of the past
now a man simply travels from one
country to another as though it were his
native land
we are no longer frightened by the
cilician pass or by the narrow sandy
tracks that lead from arabia to egypt
we are not dismayed by the height of
mountains or by the vast breadth of
rivers or by inhospitable tribes or
barbarians
to be a roman citizen is a sufficient
guarantee of personal safety
for the city of petra the period of
roman annexation would be the beginning
of the end
over the coming centuries petra would
ultimately be undone by cultural and
economic shifts that swept the whole
world along with them
in the third and fourth centuries the
roman empire would undergo some dramatic
changes
the cult of jesus christ once a small
fringe group of worshippers based around
the veneration of an executed jewish
prophet had grown to become a real
threat to roman power
for a time christianity was outlawed in
the empire and during the reign of the
emperor diocletian records show that the
christians of petra were punished for
their refusal to sacrifice to roman gods
many of them were sent to die by forced
labor in the nearby roman copper mines
of feyno
christianity was finally adopted by the
emperor constantine and would become the
major belief system of the late roman
empire
but as christian modes of worship spread
the way that people conducted ceremonies
also changed
and this would have a dramatic effect on
the commodities that people consumed and
on the people of petra
well today we think of incense as an
integral part of worship in the catholic
and orthodox churches early christians
were keen to emphasize the difference
between themselves and the old pagan
temples
for this reason christians at this time
did not use incense in their ceremonies
as pagan temples were shut down demand
for incense crashed and the price began
to fall
this broader cultural and economic
change came at the same time as egyptian
ports began to supersede the land-based
trade routes for incense spices and
silks
as an independent kingdom the nabataeans
had jealously guarded their source of
frankincense but with nabateer conquered
the romans began extracting incense by
the more efficient route carrying goods
by sea to egypt rather than on the
arduous desert roads by land
as a result the very thing that the
nabataeans had feared came to pass
the importance of petra as a trading hub
began to fall
although it had given its name to the
province of arabia petraeus the romans
also seemed to have had little use for
the rose city
the very things that had made petra
attractive to the nabataeans that is how
remote hidden and difficult to reach it
was made it an unattractive place for a
roman administration which needed good
links to the capital the romans
increasingly conducted the running of
the province from the more northern and
well-connected town of bostra
and the prominence of petra as the
administrative center of the region fell
even
further petra at this time must have
been a sad place
the former markets and workshops that
had once boomed with life and noise must
have grown smaller every year as fewer
and fewer caravans passed through
the fine cliffside houses where once
children ran and played where families
hung up their laundry and watched the
sunset would have become abandoned one
by one home only to desert bats and wild
dogs that would have howled to one
another at night
in the gradually emptying valleys
despite its declining importance petra
may still have continued as an important
trading spot were it not for the events
of the 18th of may in the year 363
a.d
it was the middle of the night when the
first tremors began
a shuddering and shaking in the earth
accompanied by a low rumble
somewhere deep in the fault line of the
red sea
the edges of the african and arabian
plates gave way against one another and
an earthquake shook the region
this would be known as the galilee
earthquake a pair of severe tremors on
the 18th and 19th of may in the year
363.
one letter thought to be written by the
bishop
cyril of jerusalem recalls the
tremendous impact of the earthquake
this event took place on monday at the
third hour
and partly at the ninth hour of the
night
there was a great loss of life here
the land was shaken
and mighty prodigies took place
and fire consumed great numbers of them
the land shook considerably and there
were great tremors in the towns round
about
many christians too living in these
regions as well as the majority of the
jews perished at that scourge and not
just in the earthquake
but also as a result of fire and in the
heavy rain they had
cyril goes on to list the settlements
most damaged by the tremors and notes
that more than half of the city of petra
was destroyed
now we should like to write down for you
the names of the towns that were
overthrown
bait gubrin
more than half of it part of bashan the
whole of sebastia and its territory the
whole of nicobolis and its territory
more than half of petra part of tiberius
ii
and its territory
haifa flowed with blood for three days
another chronicler named thomas from the
resena region wrote the following
account in which he views the earthquake
as a punishment from god for the
continuing pagan worship in the region
at that time the lord was angry with the
cities of the pagans and jews and the
samaritans and of the false teachings in
the south that are joined in with the
madness of the pagan julian
and anger went out from the lord's
presence and began to destroy the
unclean and pagan cities because they
had defiled them with blood which they
shed unjustly in them
and it began to destroy the cities 21 in
number some of which were overturned
some collapsed and yet others survived
in the month of er of the year 674
and on the 27th day in that month in the
month of haziran
archaeological evidence in petra
supports the picture of a sudden and
devastating disaster
one house excavated by archaeologists
was reduced to a pile of rubble around
this time beneath the collapsed roof a
great number of everyday domestic items
were found
lamps
shattered ceramics and glass spindles
and coins
even a copper popped with an iron handle
near the door a smashed pot contained 85
small denomination copper coins
apparently kept there for everyday
expenses
the fact that these were never reclaimed
or even looted
suggests that the damage in the city was
too great for its declining population
to even pick through
let alone rebuild from
many of petra's great public buildings
were severely hit by the earthquake
the so-called temple of the winged lions
the building known as the great temple
and the public theater were all damaged
and they would never be repaired
particularly devastating seems to have
been the earthquake's effect on the
city's water systems
subterranean pipes were cracked and
would have leaked their precious water
into the sands and some of its aqueducts
split open
dams designed to hold in reservoirs of
rainwater collapsed causing widespread
flooding and severely depleting the
city's supplies
petra's capacity to support life was
directly linked to its capacity to store
water and with the complicated system
now coming apart at the seams its water
and the city's remaining life would now
leach away into the dust of the desert
it's clear that some of petra's people
did creep back to repopulate the city
after the earthquake
in the area known as the colonnaded
street archaeology shows that some of
the earthquake debris was cleared away
and a shanty town of simple shops and
shelters was built out of material
reclaimed from the rubble
but the destruction of the city's water
system meant that the annual flash
floods were no longer being controlled
we can see the evidence of these floods
in the build-up of silt and sand in the
floors of these humble buildings
as the waters crashed down from the
rocks in the rainy season flooding
everyone's homes and then giving way to
months of punishing drought
some domestic structures were rebuilt
after the earthquake
and it's clear people tried to continue
their lives they even constructed some
new churches although they were largely
built from material scavenged from other
destroyed monuments
but in the early 5th century another
earthquake struck and after that most of
the grand houses were abandoned for good
the dream of petra had died and the city
gradually fell into disrepair and
ruined despite all of this damage people
did continue to live in reduced numbers
around the ruins of petra
and it would continue as a humble
caravan stop for several more centuries
people continued to live in the
hollowed-out cave houses
and farmed on the terraces of its hills
right up to the modern era
as the eastern roman empire morphed into
the byzantine empire the old city of
petra was even named the capital of the
province of palestina tertia
and several churches were built in and
around the city in one of them 140
papyruses were discovered which
contained mainly contracts dated up to
the year 590 showing that people were
still living in the city
according to the writer john moscas
petra even had a bishop in the first
decades of the 7th century a man named
athenogenes
but some time before the year 687
the declining fortunes of the city meant
that the position ceased to exist
when arab armies inspired by the new
faith of islam and the teachings of the
prophet muhammad swept across the region
petra doesn't seem to have featured in
their interests at all it's not
mentioned once in the narratives of the
muslim conquest and nor does it appear
in any early islamic records
as power in this region underwent
another of its great reshufflings it
seems the city of petra was finally
abandoned for good
the arabic that these new rulers spoke
was directly descended from the old
nabataean spoken by the ancient peoples
of petra but to these new conquerors the
rose city was an irrelevance a city of
tombs and ruins lost among the desert
stones
the muslims who came after and built
their own empires in the region were
struck by the incredible sight of these
monumental stones
still left at the sights of hegra and
petra
to explain them they told stories about
a tribe that they called the thamud who
were punished by god for refusing to
listen to a prophet
named salih
one version of this is given in the
quran in the surah al-araf
or the chapter of the heights
[Music]
and they flouted the commandment of
their lord
and they said
o sally
bring upon us that thou threatenest
if thou art indeed of those sent from
allah
so the earthquake sees them
and mourning found them prostrate in
their dwelling place
and sally
turned from them and said
o my people i delivered my lord's
message unto you and gave you good
advice
but he loved not good advices
as for the earth we spread it out and
placed it upon its firm mountains
and caused everything to grow there in
perfect balance
and we made in it means of sustenance
for you and others
we send fertilizing winds and bring down
rain from the sky for you to drink
but the residents of the stone valley
also denied the messengers
we gave them our signs
but they turned away from them
they carved their homes in the mountains
feeling secure
but the mighty blast overtook them in
the morning
and all they achieved
was of no help to them
for these later people the towering
ruins of the nabataean cities became
warnings about excessive pride and a
reminder that the power of nature or the
power of god
can always undo the works of man
for others the ruins inspired
poetry i want to end the episode with a
reading from one of the great
pre-islamic poets a man named tarafa
he wrote poetry that responded to the
ruined sights that littered the horizon
of the arab peninsula
left by peoples like the nabataeans
in this poem he describes how the sight
of these ruins
leads him to think about the transients
and the injustice of life
as you listen imagine what it would feel
like to live in the great city of petra
during its final days to watch the life
slowly ebb from the city around you as
the caravans arrived in fewer and fewer
numbers across the sands
imagine the earthquakes cracking the
great stones of the city the feeling of
hopelessness as the water systems broke
and no one left knew how to repair them
as people
departed across the desert to begin new
lives in other places
imagine watching the sands creep in to
cover the streets the homes and markets
the stables and the workshops finally
leaving nothing in the city but its
tombs
[Music]
the ruins howler left on the mottled
flatlands of tamad appear and fade
like the trace of a tattoo on the back
of a hand
there my friends halted tall camels over
me saying
don't lose yourself in grief man endure
a man's soul flies to his throat in fear
and he imagines impending ruin though no
one stalks his evening journey waiting
death does not miss the brave
its slackened ropes around him hand
around the twisted coils
a generous man quenches his soul while
he is still alive
i see the tomb of the hoarder panting
for his wealth like the tomb of the
wasteful evil doer both the same
two heaps of earth were silent slabs of
hard death stone piled up upon them
i see death choose the generous and the
noble
while picking over the best part of the
hardened rich man's spoil
i see life a treasure
shrinking every night
shrunken by days and time
then gone
[Music]
thank you once again for listening to
the fall of civilization's podcast
i'd like to thank my voice actors for
this episode nick denton j forrester
peter walters paul casell
and annie kelly
i love to hear your thoughts and
responses on twitter
so please come and tell me what you
thought
you can follow me at paul m m cooper and
if you'd like updates about the podcast
announcements about new episodes as well
as images maps and reading suggestions
you can follow the podcast at fall of
civ pod with underscores separating the
words
this podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on patreon you keep me running you help
me cover my costs and you let me
dedicate more time to researching
writing recording and editing to get the
episodes out to you faster and bring as
much life and detail to them as possible
i want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen
if you enjoyed this episode please
consider heading onto patreon.com
forward slash fall of civilizations
underscore podcast
or just google fall of civilization's
patreon that's p-a-t-r-e-o-n
for now goodbye and thanks for listening
[Music]
you